I will not waste any time.
So the goal of this session is to
get the best performance out of
your Java application on Mac OS X.
Whether you're writing a new
one or whether you already have
one that you're porting from
Mac OS 9 or some other platform.
So what we'll cover in this
session is try and give you an
understanding of the characteristics
of the Mac OS X Java performance.
Some techniques and patterns you
can use in your code to try and
get optimal performance on 10.
point out why measurement is
critically important whenever
you're trying to do optimization.
And then lastly,
we'll have a demonstration of
some performance analysis to give
you an idea of what sort of tools
will be available on Mac OS X.
So without further remiss,
I'll introduce Ivan Posva
from the Java VM team.
He's our tech lead.
Thank you, Ivan.
Good afternoon.
Well, I wanted to question first,
what are the Java performance factors?
Well, first of all, it's your application
design and implementation.
If you have algorithms that
don't scale to your problem set,
there is no performance tuning
we can do in the VM at any rate
that will improve your app.
So you have to make sure that you
don't have N-square algorithms
or anything like that in there.
The second factor is the amount of
memory your application is consuming.
The more memory you use,
the more likely you
are to be swapping out,
to be paging,
the more stress you're putting
on the VM memory subsystem,
and the less likely you
are benefiting from caches,
data cache and instruction cache.
Then the next factor down
is bytecode execution.
The second factor down is the speed
of the application performance.
It is at what speed does the
Java VM execute your Java code?
Jim will talk about tips and tricks,
do's and don'ts in the second part of
his talk on what you can do in this area.
I will concentrate more on
Java VM efficiency in the
first part of this talk.
There are two other factors
that influence Java performance.
One is the speed of the underlying OS.
We are not touching Java VM efficiency
in the first part of this talk.
Then there is obviously the speed
of the hardware you're running on.
Let's look at what
Java VM efficiency means.
There are two most cited issues that
influence Java performance at runtime.
One of them is memory management.
It is the footprint of your application,
the footprint of your
Java process running.
That includes your Java heap once.
That includes all the supporting
Java VM memory structures.
We are actually using the
Java heap for that as well.
It includes parts for the OS,
parts for the code, for the VM and so on.
Then second is the speed of allocation.
Java is very object heavy.
You allocate a lot of temporary objects,
so you need to be able to allocate
those objects very quickly.
To keep your footprint down,
if you just allocate very
quickly and never reclaim,
you would grow your
footprint to infinity.
That's why you have to reclaim
very efficiently as well.
I will touch briefly on what we do
there or how you can actually help
us as Java programmers in that area.
The second part is synchronization.
Java has built-in support for
multithreading in the language.
To make that... To make that viable use,
we actually have to make sure that
the synchronization primitives
are implemented in a very
efficient manner inside the VM.
Another part is startup performance.
There must be hundreds of
Java benchmarks out there on the web,
small and big, and some useful,
some less.
But I've never seen one that actually
measures Java startup performance.
You don't want your application to
start up for a minute or two minutes
seeing the bouncing icon in the dock,
so I will touch some of the issues
we have done to address that issue.
Most notably, reducing class loading.
Class loading is about 40%
of your Java VM startup.
I will touch on what you can do
to prevent or actually to help
us out with startup performance.
Direct Performance.
So let's go to memory management first.
The Hotspot VM that we ship on
Mac OS X has an accurate compacting
generational copying garbage collector.
What do those buzzwords mean?
Accurate means we know at all
times where in the VM you have
references to your object.
We can distinguish between
real references to objects and
just memory location that look
like references to objects.
Compacting is also means
that we compact the heap.
We don't leave any holes in the heap,
meaning
All the memory you use is
basically moved together,
compacted, well, as it says,
and that improves both your
footprint and locality of reference.
Generational copying means
that we allocate objects for a
first time in a new generation,
and only when they survive
for a certain amount of time,
we actually copy them
into an older generation,
which we handle much less frequently
than the newly allocated objects.
So we spend a lot of cycles
on newly allocated objects,
collecting newly allocated objects.
For older objects,
we don't spend that time.
So there is one thing.
Lifetime of your objects is important.
If you have objects that
you're not going to use,
you have to null out the references.
If you have object hierarchies
that you're not using anymore,
null out the reference to that
object hierarchy to actually give
the garbage collector an opportunity
to remove all the space that is
allocated for those object hierarchies.
Then the second part is if you use
If you use some caches or have objects
that can be recreated at a later time,
you can use the weak reference class
or soft reference class to give the
collector a hint or an opportunity
to remove objects out of your working
set if the memory is getting tight.
Avoid finalizers where you can.
Objects that can be finalized need
to be handled specially in the VM.
We need to actually call the runtime
from interpreted or compiled code
to allocate objects with finalizers
because we have to keep track of them.
That makes it very hard
to allocate quickly.
All other allocation is done in line
in interpreted and compiled code.
For finalizable objects,
we first have to... We have
to keep track of them by
allocating through the runtime.
Then we actually have...
When we are throwing them away,
we have to make sure to call
the finalizers when you're done.
If you can avoid finalizers, please do.
To reduce your footprint,
it is helpful to do lazy
initialization and allocation.
That way you reduce your footprint
as well as reduce your startup time
to increase the startup performance.
What did we do to memory management
to improve some footprint issues?
Well,
we introduced a shared generation that
stores the often used classes and methods
including their bytecodes and so on.
And this shared generation
is mapped in from a file,
so we used the underlying
Mach virtual memory system to just
bring that memory into the VM.
We reduced the GC time because
we never tried to collect,
reclaim that memory.
It is basically free.
Because we read it from a file,
we are never touching it,
so we share it across multiple
running Java processes.
The thing you can help us there is, well,
don't break it.
Don't change your boot class path.
Do not modify the system jar files
that are installed on the system.
And that way we can always use the
shared generation when we start the VM.
It has additional
benefit in startup time,
which I'm going to touch now.
Avoid eager class loading
and class initialization.
It has both effect on startup time
as well as your memory footprint.
If you don't load those classes
when you don't need them,
you're not using the memory as well
as you're spending cycles to actually
load them from the class file,
decode them, bring them into memory,
initialize, and so on.
So if you want to see which
classes are loaded at what time,
you can use the -verbose:class flag
on the command line to see what is
loaded at what time and in which order.
So as I mentioned before,
the shared generation reduces class
load time because most of the classes
you're going to use out of Java lang,
Java net, swing, and so on,
have been preloaded for you in that
shared generation and are mapped
from the file when you actually--
When you start the VM.
So when you run the above
command that I mentioned,
java-verbose-class with version,
you don't see any class
loading going on at all.
So the other part was synchronization.
The hotspot VM we are using has very fast
synchronization in the uncontended case.
What does an uncontended case mean?
When you synchronize on an object,
the object is synchronized.
One thread at a time.
That is most often the case.
You don't have any
locking really going on,
but you want to protect if some other
thread happened to be in that code.
For this,
we have a constant time overhead.
The inline implementation in the
compiler or in the interpreter
takes about 8 to 10 instructions.
It has very low memory overhead.
We don't allocate any space for
these object locks on the heap.
They're all stack allocated in the
stack frame that you're locking this
object that you're synchronizing on.
We don't use any of the underlying
OS resources because that is expensive.
That ties down memory,
sometimes even in the kernel,
which you want to void.
The contended case is rare for that,
but since it happens,
for that we use Mach primitives directly.
To speed up,
to get as much performance as we can.
Before I want to hand
over this talk to Jim,
I wanted to tell you what's new in 2001.
We shipped Mac OS X.
It has a shared generation.
That is one of the big improvements
we did to the Java virtual
machine we got from Sun.
In the 1.3.1 developer
preview we're working on,
or that should be the first one,
we're working on the developer preview.
We did inline interpreter allocation.
This was not in Mac OS X.
We're working on thread local allocation.
We have a faster instance off and
faster array copy that is tuned
to G4 with the velocity engine.
We use the same code actually for,
the code we use for our array copy we
are also using inside the GC to copy
the objects between the generations.
We're making use of that.
We're making use of that
code in multiple areas.
So now I would want to
give this over to Jim.
Thanks.
So memory management and synchronization
is a crucial part of what affects
the performance of your application.
But I think fundamentally when
we're working with Java code,
we think in terms of the speed of
the code execution as being the key
factor in determining what is actually
slowing down our particular application.
So what I'm going to try to
do in this talk is describe
how things get interpreted,
how they get compiled,
when they get interpreted,
when they get compiled,
and give you some ideas on some
of the coding hints that you can
use to speed up the performance
once you find out what kinds of
weaknesses you have in your code.
And I'm also going to run
through a few things that
have changed in the last year,
since our talk last year.
So first of all, I want to point out that
people often question,
well, why don't we compile everything?
Obviously,
if you turn everything into native code,
it's going to run a lot faster
than if we interpret it.
But because the Java environment
compiles code on the fly
using just-in-time compilers,
there's a certain amount of cost,
both in CPU and memory usage,
in order to get things compiled.
And when you're doing some
analysis of the actual VM,
you find out that it's actually
cheaper to interpret the code,
because the interpreter is fairly fast,
cheaper to interpret the
code than actually go off and
compile it and try to run it.
So we have to get a balance
there on what actually gets
interpreted and what gets compiled.
[Transcript missing]
So using the criteria of
the number of invocations,
the number of times it loops,
we can actually sort of find out
what is actually hot in your code.
And we find out it's only about 5% of
the bytecodes of 5% of your applications
or methods that need to be compiled
and hence are hot in your application.
And Andy will be going over some of the
tools which will allow you to determine
which of those methods are actually
getting compiled in native code.
And we can,
once we've got that information,
we can start tweaking those particular
methods because those are the methods
that are going to be problematic.
So I'm just going to go through and
discuss a few things that you can do
to get the best performance out of your
application and types of things that
you can concentrate on once you find
out what's hot in your application.
The first,
the most important thing I said is that
you can't just keep compiling your code.
You can't just keep compiling your code.
And if only a small portion
of your method is actually
being used all the time,
maybe you have some exception code
in there or some special case code,
it's doing a disservice to the
compilation process by having
it embedded in your method.
So you should try to break that
code out into separate methods and
try to keep your method focused,
small and focused,
so that it can compile quickly
and then go off and execute.
And then you get good locality
also of the execution of the code.
So as I say, separate rarely used code
out into separate methods.
As far as saying to yourself, well,
if I put it into a separate method,
then we're going to incur the
cost of calling that method,
basically pushing parameters
and so on and so forth.
But you find that in the VM,
we actually inline things that make
sense to inline if we can make more
optimal use of the code by inlining
it as opposed to having it separately.
So don't worry about that.
And in particular,
accessor methods are always inlined,
so you don't have to
worry about the fact that,
well, I've got a very tiny method and
all it does is extract the field.
And with the 131 code,
we actually have a much tighter
implementation of accessors,
so they are very fast.
One of the things that I like to do
is actually try to find which methods
that are used fairly frequently
in the class libraries and tweak
the code specifically to handle
those because those are the routines
that are used a lot by everybody.
And we want to try to get good
performance for those particular methods.
So trust the supplied classes.
You may have the urge to go out
and rewrite the vector class
because it synchronizes every time
you access it and does an object,
you know, a check cast every time
you do extraction from it.
You know,
these are the sorts of things that
we notice that are used a lot.
So we hand tool, or not hand tool,
but we provide special service for
those particular types of methods
that are used fairly frequently.
So instead of going off
and writing your own,
trust the supplied classes.
So classes such as string, string buffer,
vector, and the collection classes,
you know,
use what's there because we're going to,
you know, get the performance up for you.
And we've added some more optimization or
more special cases for those in the 131.
If you have a copy that you're
copying from one array to another,
use array copy because,
as Ivan mentioned,
that we're using G4 acceleration.
So you can do that on the array copy,
and hence it's going to be
the fastest way of doing it.
So instead of having a
loop that iterates through,
use array copy.
And then, of course,
there's certain functions like sine,
cosine, and tan,
which have native implementation.
So it's best to use, you know,
what's supplied and not go off and write
your own JNI routines to deal with that.
Make the best use of
the native data types.
Again, the G4 is not a 64-bit processor,
so whenever you have a long arithmetic,
it has a certain amount of
cost associated with it.
Some of the basic operations like add
and subtract or bit and or whatever,
they're reasonably cheap,
but when you get into shifting
or divide or that sort of thing,
it can be fairly costly.
So if you don't need all that precision,
stick with ints for the time being.
And then also consider using
floats instead of doubles.
Not necessarily in your computation,
because sometimes you
just need the precision,
but when you're dealing
with arrays of values,
it's best to keep the size of
your arrays down by using floats.
And there are quite well-known techniques
for actually keeping precision,
even though you're using a 32-bit value.
And then new to the 131,
we've added Bedrock.
It's a better register
allocation for long,
floats, and doubles.
So you'll find that some of the, say,
especially if you're doing
a looping-type calculation,
that performance will
be improved on that.
Try to avoid using the generic data types
because there is a cost in assigning,
say, a generic data type to
a specific data type.
We have to go through a check cast.
Ivan mentioned that we've done some
performance improvements in 1.3.1 to
deal with instance of and check cast.
But it's still a cost.
Instead of a simple assignment,
we have to go off and do this
to make sure that it's the
right class for doing that.
So try to avoid using generic types
and use subtyping or subclassing
in these circumstances because
then that way you can avoid making
assignments that require these checks.
Try to work with local copies.
Now, one of the things about people have
been asking about was why is the code
generated by a hotspot client slower,
let's say, than maybe the server version
and so on and so forth.
Well, some of the optimizations you
get in the server version of the
compiler are very sophisticated,
and they're not there
in the client because,
again,
we want to try to compile things fairly
quickly and get them up and running.
So, if you have array access and you're
working with that array value,
it's best to make a copy of
that value and work with that
copy and put it back in again.
In this particular example,
you have three accesses to that array.
That means we have to do three
bounds checks and three null
checks to see on the table itself,
whereas if we make a copy of it,
we only have to do two in this case.
And then, plus,
you get the locality issues
where if you're working
with the value in registers.
In this case,
what would happen is value would be
assigned to a register as opposed
to going back to the array that you
get performance boost there as well.
This is sort of a
de-optimization of your code.
One of the things that people run into,
especially on MP machines,
is with a lot of threading,
if you have access to global values,
they're kind of wondering why the
values are sort of changing or
not changing from underneath them.
Make sure that if you
have a global value,
a global static that's being accessed
from several different threads
or written to by other threads,
that you use the keyword volatile.
One of the optimizations
a compiler will do is say,
well, this is a value that I've
already got a copy of.
Why should I go back
and get the original?
If you put the keyword volatile,
this will guarantee that
things will get reloaded every
time you access the variable.
Use static finals.
This basically specifies
that the variable,
say in this case buffer size,
is a constant.
And the compiler can treat
that as a constant all the way
through the code and optimize,
do constant folding.
In this example,
we know that the character array that
we're allocating is a fixed size.
We know that the initialization of
the buffer in the loop is going to
iterate a fixed number of times.
So take advantage of that by making
sure that you declare your statics
as final if they're going to be
constant throughout your execution.
There's a certain cost involved
in invoking anything which is a
virtual call or an interface call.
In the case of virtual calls,
we have to do an index into a
table to find the address of the
method that we want to dispatch to.
In interfaces,
it's a little bit more complicated
because we actually have to do a match
to make sure that we match the class
of the method that we want to invoke.
So virtuals are a little
bit cheaper than interfaces.
So if you have a choice,
try to stick with subclassing as
opposed to creating interfaces,
and you'll get better
performance that way.
In the Hotspot VM,
we actually cache the call so that
from any particular call site,
we know which method
worked for us last time.
We try to reuse that so we don't
actually do a lookup each time.
But there is still a cost
in that initial lookup.
and whatnot,
so try to use virtual versus interfaces.
One of the optimizations that
we've done in the Hotspot
compiler is dealing with switches.
You can create switch statements with
fairly sparse values in your cases.
In traditional compilation,
what would happen in those
situations is that they would
create a big if-then-else.
We were using a technique
of double indexing,
which will allow us to actually
just dispatch basically
fairly quickly on any switch.
It's not a nested-if combination.
So if you're comparing a single
variable against an integer data type,
utilize switches over if statements.
More and more, you know,
as more and more people
are learning to program,
some of the new people new to programming
have a tendency to use exceptions
for control of their program flow.
You really should try to use exceptions
for the exceptional cases and not
for actual flow of your program.
So,
because there is quite a bit of cost in
the VM to actually handle that exception.
So, if you're going to,
if there's a good likelihood
that the routine you're calling
is going to produce an error,
then you should probably use error codes
and test the result when you come back
as opposed to throwing the exception.
Because that would be faster than
actually throwing the exception
and having the VM deal with it.
And finally,
I think you should think pure Java.
In the 1.3.1 code,
we've implemented something
called compiled natives,
which allow you to call
JNI code fairly efficiently.
We don't have to go through
any kind of marshaling code,
which marshals up the parameters and
then goes off and calls the routine.
What happens with these
compiled natives is that we
actually have a thunking layer,
which already knows what the parameters
are going to look like and assembles the
parameters for a call to the JNI routine.
So on one side,
your JNI calls are going to
be a little bit more efficient
and faster on the 1.3.1.
But on the other side,
there still is a cost
in using JNI or JDirect,
which is built on top of JNI.
There's this translation layer involved,
and it costs.
And then also,
if you're dealing with callbacks,
it's going to require
some kind of lookup.
So you should try to use
Java wherever you possibly can.
And try to avoid going off.
And as time goes on,
we're going to get the
compiler faster and faster.
And you can forget about C and C++.
Okay, with that, I'll pass it on to Andy.
Hi.
So I get to do my little bit now where
I talk about how important measuring is.
So all of this,
all of the information that we've
been giving you is kind of useless if
you then go and apply it willy-nilly
to your entire 60 megabyte code base.
It's really important.
All the textbook advice that
says don't optimize prematurely.
It's really true.
What you should be doing is measuring,
finding the major bottlenecks,
optimizing those bottlenecks,
making sure that it actually worked
because we've seen optimizations that
have actually slowed things down.
I'll also go through what
you should try and measure.
How with the 131 Java VM we've improved
things and how you've actually got tools
to enable you to measure those things.
And then I'll just cover a few
little myths that are still
around in all those textbooks that
are not quite true on Mac OS X.
So the first obvious thing
that you always think of is
how fast is my program going?
You look at the CPU meter on
Mac OS X and it's pegged at 100%.
So obviously you should be looking
at where the CPU time is going.
Your program, whatever it's doing,
is CPU limited.
The first thing that we do
for you in Hotspot is we
compile all those hot methods.
We're counting which one gets
used most and we're compiling
the ones that get used,
get called most frequently.
So, obviously look at the hot methods,
look at those ones that
are being compiled.
And I'll cover how using
Xprof will actually tell you
which ones have been compiled.
Now secondly, depending on where that
CPU meter is reading,
you might be using system
CPU and not user CPU.
In which case you might be paging.
And the poor old OS is trying to just
read and write things from disk and
shuffle things around in the VM system.
Paging is really expensive.
So if you're running on a 128 meg system
and you set your heap to 256 megs,
well, we think you've got 256 megs so
we'll happily go and allocate
and we won't do full GCs until
we think we've run out of heap.
But in the meantime
you'll be paging madly.
So think very much about controlling
your footprint and heap usage.
Now other times you get into
situations where your CPU isn't pegged,
and in fact, at first glance your program
seems to be doing nothing.
And that's probably what it is doing.
It's probably waiting for the
disk or the network to reply.
So there are some tools on Mac OS X,
some of which are covered,
I will mention here,
some of which are covered in the
performance tools talk later,
that allow you to look at
what your program is doing
I/O wise and network wise.
And then lastly,
one of the things that we talked about,
synchronization.
Monitor contention can
get very expensive.
And the reason for that is that,
especially on 10,
if you're used to Mac OS 9,
switching threads and processes
was relatively expensive because it
didn't have the memory protection
and preemption behind it.
Whereas on 10, when we switch a thread,
there's all the state in the processor
that has to be saved out to memory.
And when we switch processes, i.e.
threads between processes,
you've got to save all
of that context as well.
So it's a lot more expensive than 9,
so that's one thing to bear in mind.
So how do you go about measuring all
of the things that I've talked about?
The best thing is, from your perspective,
is to use a commercial performance tool.
One example of which is Optimizeit,
which Scott will be demoing
just after I've talked.
It provides CPU profiling
and/or sampling.
So profiling is a way of tracking each
and every time methods get called.
Sampling does a statistical analysis.
There are pros and cons of each.
Profiling gives you a very
precise measure of exactly
how often things get called.
Sampling is less invasive.
Your program doesn't slow down so much.
So depending on what you're doing,
one or the other is better.
You can also look at object allocation,
which objects are getting allocated,
where they get allocated, etc.
Scott will cover a lot of
that in the demonstration,
I think.
The other thing you can do
with Hotspot that we provide
in the 1.3.1 developer preview,
HProf is now functional.
It wasn't in Cheetah.
And that's--HPROF is implemented
as a library loaded at runtime that
uses the JVMPI interface in Hotspot.
Secondly, you can use XPROF,
which is a per thread
kind of measurement.
And there's minus XA-PROF issue
allocation information.
So as I mentioned,
HProf comes with the developer preview
one that's available on the website.
It's a basic CPU and
monitor profiling tool.
So it doesn't give you a lot of
it gives you a lot of nitty gritty
detail and not a lot of analysis.
There's a relatively simple
UI available from Javasoft's website
that gives you a primitive GUI on top
and lets you drill down a little bit.
And I've used that to a certain
extent and that's quite helpful.
It's relatively simple to use.
You just pass a couple of command
line parameters and you tell
it whether you want to sample
or look at monitor contention,
etc.
And this is the,
it turns out that the perf-vanil
tool only works with CPU sampling.
It doesn't work if you use profiling.
You should use the first example.
The monitor contention will give you
a little bit of information about
how much time each thread spends
waiting on a particular monitor.
So if you're seeing an application that
you can't really see why it's slow,
but there seems to be a lot going on,
probably one of the first things you
should do is look at monitor contention.
You can see dramatic performance
improvements there because
when we get contention as
to the cases where we don't,
as Ivan explained earlier,
it's a case of going through ten
instructions in line in the interpreter
or the compiler versus several thousand
cycles going into the kernel and
doing context switches and the like.
So that's why it's expensive.
MinusXAProf will give you a
simple allocation profile.
So you run your program and
right at the end it'll just,
when it exits,
it'll spit out this dump of all
the objects that got allocated,
how much space they took up,
the average instance size, etc.
And you can, just from that information,
you can say, well,
maybe I shouldn't be allocating so
many vectors or hash tables or etc.
But it doesn't give you any information
about where they got allocated,
which is why it's, you know,
optimize it or something like
that is much more useful.
MinusXProf is of somewhat
limited use because it gives
you per-thread information.
So if you have a program
that forks 400 threads,
like VolanoMock or something
that I tend to run on and off,
at the end of the program when it exits,
it spits out 400 copies
of the information,
which is not very useful.
But it is the only way that I know
of where we actually list out the
methods that got compiled versus
the ones that get interpreted,
and how much time we spend in
interpreted code versus native
code versus compiled code,
and how much time we spend in GC, etc.
So that can give you some
very useful insight on,
first of all, which methods got compiled.
And you might look at it and say,
hang on a minute,
I expected method A to get compiled
because I was under the impression
that this was my most expensive method.
But it turns out that in fact
we didn't go anywhere near that,
we didn't compile it,
or maybe we did and we couldn't compile
it because it's got some funny assembler
or some construct or it's too big,
etc.
So that will pinpoint which
methods are getting compiled.
You can sanity check that the
ones that are getting compiled
are the ones you expect.
Once you know the ones
that are getting compiled,
you can then focus your
optimizations on those methods.
And as a little example
use down at the bottom,
it's very simple to use.
But like I said,
don't try it with 400 threads.
Just do it on something
with a minimal number.
Now measuring memory is a little
harder because the Java VM has several
different perspectives on what memory is.
As far as you are concerned,
the only memory you can
really have any control of is
the memory in the Java heap.
The tips that Ivan explained
whereby you null out references,
you try and avoid using finalizers, etc.
That's the kind of thing you can control.
Other than that,
so you can watch the heap as it grows
and shrinks using the VeloC flag.
As we mentioned,
verbose class will show you
classes as they get loaded.
You might see classes getting
loaded before you think
you should be using them,
and that's an example where you
should sort of go in and pinpoint
why they're getting pulled in,
and maybe you can load them a bit later.
There's a command called top which
will give you an overall memory
View of the whole system.
And that's good for splitting
out memory that's being shared.
For example,
when you run multiple Java processes,
some of the memory that we pull
in from the shared generation is
shared between several processes.
And you can tell the difference between
memory that's privately allocated,
I used in the heap for you,
versus memory that's being shared
in the shared generation or is being
shared because of dynamic libraries
that are being pulled in by native code,
either your code or our.
VM Map is another command line utility.
It gives you a lot more specific
insight on the intricacies of
the virtual memory being used.
And it's relatively complicated.
If you want to learn a bit more about it,
they might cover it in
the performance tools.
It turns out that Java VMs are
improving faster than the books about
performance in Java can be written.
So there are quite a few books out there,
most of which contain
extremely good advice.
But some of their tips just...
become outdated with time
as the technology rolls on.
Um, traditionally in 1.0 VMs, 1.1 VMs,
allocation was very slow.
They had a malloc based
allocation scheme or something.
Our allocation is now extremely cheap.
Now the initialization
of an object may not be,
but allocating it is few instructions.
As a result of that,
and as a result of the scavenging,
short-lived objects are very
cheap to GC because we essentially
don't do anything with them.
We just throw them away at
the end of their life cycle.
Synchronized methods cost us small,
as Ivan mentioned.
And the contended case
is still expensive.
Now, lastly, as I hinted at before,
system calls which involve
entry into the kernel,
just because of the whole context
switching and a little bit more
weight involved than with Mac OS 9,
they are expensive.
There are certain things that we
do on your behalf as part of the
Java APIs that involve system calls,
network operations, I/O operations,
things like that, thread yield.
All of those are system calls.
So if you don't need
to do things like that,
avoid them.
So here's a quick graph
which you've seen before.
This is the peak allocation performance
from various different technologies.
I think Blaine showed it in his talk.
And you can see that this includes
the garbage collection side of things,
so it's not just allocation.
And you see that Compile Java,
which is the tall one,
is just way faster than
any other technology.
Now, so here's an example that
I pulled from a performance book
published a year or two ago.
They gave us an example of one thing
you can do to improve performance:
pooling objects.
So that you avoid, by recycling them,
you avoid the cost of
allocating and GCing them.
So I wrote a little benchmark
and I ran it on my G4 PowerBook.
And I got this sort of description.
So as I increased the number of threads,
you can see for the single
and two-threaded cases,
the pooling is just slightly faster.
So I'm allocating 100,000 and then...
Filling them up and
then throwing them away,
etc.
But when you get to a
larger number of threads,
you can see that the time taken
to actually recycle these vectors
is actually longer than it took
to create them and GC them.
Now, in the dual processor case,
the moment you go to anything
other than single threaded,
the simple allocate and throw
away mechanism is faster.
And the point being is that you
don't have to incorporate any
complicated pooling code if you
just do the brain dead thing and
just allocate and throw it away.
So, this is one example where the
technology has just moved on and
that little truth about pooling
things is not quite so true.
Now,
On the other hand, if you have an object,
in this particular example I'm
talking about a Java thread,
that is extremely expensive
to create and initialize.
The expense of creating a thread
involves a couple of kernel trips to
create the internal data structures.
[Transcript missing]
The corollary is that sometimes,
especially with something like a thread,
which involves a kernel data structure,
it can actually be costly
to keep them around as well.
So you have this trade-off between
some things get more performant,
but on the other hand,
you have to pay the penalty of
keeping the kernel-wide memory around,
and the extra stack, etc.
So this little graph just,
there's an example web
server on Sun's site,
which, brain dead simple, it just,
it's a web server.
sits in a socket listening for a request,
gets a request, it hands it off to a
thread to respond to it,
and sends back a response.
So I took that example and
I produced three variants,
one of which forks a new
thread for every request,
the second one which uses a
pooled collection of threads,
and then a third one where all the worker
threads themselves actually sit and
accept and handle the request directly,
so there is no listen thread.
And the purple, sorry, the line...
Well, this is the response time
as seen by the client.
So with the version that forks a
different thread for every request,
it just doesn't scale as the
number of requests go up.
You just see a response time
that degrades with n squared
according to the number of clients.
The others degrade as well,
but they degrade much more gracefully.
Now interestingly,
I had kind of expected when I did
this exercise that the version running
multiple threads in Accept would scale
even better than the pooled version.
And lo and behold,
it isn't actually that true.
So that's actually a--I really
wanted to include this slide
because it's an indication of
why you should be measuring.
Because my expectations were dashed.
Now on a dual processor it's
really interesting as well because
The Perth Red one seems to
be doing almost as well as
the the pooled versions.
That was somewhat unexpected.
But then I realized that what's
happening in the pooled versions
is that I'm getting a lot more
contention because I'm on an MP system.
So the version where I'm running
multiple workers in Accept is
actually the best performing one.
And the reason for that is
because all of the contention
is handled right in the kernel,
right at the accept call,
rather than everything coming
out and fighting over the socket.
So our conclusion is very simple.
Your application design is paramount.
That's the most important part
of the performance of your app.
There's a lot of new stuff in recent
VMs and in Hotspot and on Mac OS X that
have improved some of those bottlenecks.
If you follow our advice,
you'll get better compiled code,
and so your app will run faster.
And where you are seeing bottlenecks,
just keep measuring and improving
those things and you'll see results.
So what we're going to do now,
Scott's going to come up and give
a demonstration of Optimizeit.
So I'm going to show you Optimize It.
I showed the memory portion of Optimize
It at the Java development tools session.
So I'm going to concentrate
on the profiling portion.
It's a tool written by a
company called VM Gear.
They used to be called Intuitive.
It's a pure Java tool.
It uses just a tiny
little bit of native code,
so it's mostly pure.
The way it works is it just
sort of instantiates its own
hooks between you and the VM,
and then you run your
application on top of it,
and then you're able to just look
at all the same kind of profiling
stuff that you see in like Xprof and
memory profiling and all that stuff.
It's really cool.
We use it at Apple.
We've been helping them
get it up and running,
and we've been using it to actually
work on all of our AWT work and swing
work to find all of our bottlenecks.
I mean, it saved us tons of time,
and we're hoping that we
can convince them to get it.
We've got a developer
release out for you guys.
They've committed to a
fourth quarter release,
so that's good that we have
it coming out eventually.
So let me just go right
to my demo machine.
There's not that much
I have to say about it,
but this is my CAN sorting table demo.
This is right out of SwingSet.
I just put in names
of people on our team,
and I added some sorting to it.
I didn't use any of
the collection classes.
I wrote my own sort.
So I wrote the worst sort possible.
I do a little bubble sort here.
So it's kind of slow.
So I click here,
and I sort by first name,
and that's sorted.
And that's only 58 items
that I sorted by first name,
and I sort by last name.
So that's not really good,
and I actually pause all of
the UI while I'm sorting.
So I want to figure out what's going on.
Why is this taking so long?
So what I'm going to do is I'm
going to go over to Optimize It,
which I've already launched,
and if I want to hook into this,
I started this other app
using Optimize It stubs,
and I'm going to do this
through remote debugging.
You can launch it all through here,
but I kind of like doing the
remote thing because it shows you
can do it on a separate machine.
So I'm going to go to Remote Application.
It's already been set up on
this machine on this port.
I have my source path set up,
so I'll just attach to that.
and it'll just take a
second for it to connect up.
It gets, I had this all set up
for my demo this morning.
So this is the memory,
the memory profile of everything,
all the objects that have
been instantiated and there's
a lot of cool stuff in here.
But I'm going to go
into the CPU profiler.
So the CPU profiler hasn't been
profiling until you tell it to.
So that's one of the big
differences between this and like
X-Prof is you get to profile just
a segment of the application that
you want and you can turn it on,
do your work, turn it back off.
So what I'm going to do is I'm
going to press on the button,
go to my application and click
sort and click sort again.
Let's do another one.
Then I'll go back here and I'll stop.
So here's one of the cool things.
Here are all of our threads.
Red is idle, green is active.
And there are even groups of threads,
like main, system.
So if I just start generally at the
main thread and I'm looking around
trying to see what's going on.
And let me flip this around
into the normal execution path.
So what we have right now is 49% of
this happened through event dispatch,
which makes sense because we clicked
on buttons to do most of our work.
And then 34% of it was in thread run.
Now, I know I wrote this application
and I have a separate thread that
gets spawned off every time I sort.
I actually created a new thread.
I wrote this really badly.
So I spawned a new
thread and I run my sort.
So if I look through here and I can
see that I have my sort and it ends up
calling greater than because I'm doing an
excellent single directional bubble sort.
And I have a greater than and I have
some of my time in two string.
So let's see what else is going
on inside of greater than.
I've got a compare
inside of greater than.
And there's something
called two lowercase.
So that immediately is,
there's something going on here.
And I can look, if I just click here and
I double click on this,
it'll bring up my source code viewer.
And I see there's some two lowercase
that's inside of the AWT code.
And I don't care that much about it.
But two lowercase is
taking up a lot of time.
And that's inside of,
there's a whole bunch
of things inside of AWT.
But I want to see my stuff.
So mine is, I want to see my stuff.
So my sort data is my class.
And let's see what's
going on in my compare.
And I can see right here
that I get two strings.
And to compare them,
I turn them into lowercase first because
I want them to be case insensitive.
And then I compare them
character by character.
And, okay, so you know that's really bad.
You know, actually,
I've had an engineer who's done this
before at another company I was at.
So there are a lot of
things that you could,
this immediately drives you crazy.
So I'm going to go ahead and do that.
And this immediately drives you there.
Now, I sort of dove around here
because I wanted you to
see this allocation graph.
It's pretty cool.
It shows you, you know,
each allocation entry point
and how much time is spent.
You can even get sub percentages.
So if I select here, I think,
if I mouse over here,
it says that 99.25% of the time
is spent inside of this compare.
And that's just my compare.
That's not anything else going on.
If I want to see right down here,
this would tell me immediately
what the problems are.
These are my hotspots.
And this is just taking
the individual methods,
no matter who called them,
whatever direction,
and showing you what percentage of
your time is spent in those hotspots.
And if you flip the graph back around,
you can start from the hotspots
back down and you can see
who's calling each hotspot.
And you can look and
see that two lowercase.
Okay, who's calling that?
And it really is only from one place.
It's from my sorter.
So that's kind of cool.
And I found that pretty easily.
here just on the main thread,
but you can also go into
your individual threads.
And I can say,
let's just look exactly at the sorter.
I looked at the whole main thing and
included all my event loops and stuff.
So if we look at my sorter,
my sorter's even worse.
It's got 60% spent in there.
So if I actually had a big list
I was trying to sort or something,
I could do it a little better.
So without, I'm going to reprofile again.
Let me go back here.
So I have this thing called Fixit.
Now,
this really shouldn't be called Fixit.
This should be like, don't be so stupid.
Which is, what this is doing is it's
not doing a whole to lower.
It's getting each character,
lower casing the characters,
and testing against those.
That's a little better.
So I'll turn that on and I'll
Reprofile again.
Do a sort by first.
Oh, I already did that.
So I'll click these a
couple times back and forth.
And we'll see that now we don't
even have anything about lowercase
in our... Let me get up here,
actually.
Sorry.
We'll see some lowercase in here,
but it's not going to be as huge.
I can't even find it right now.
So that's pretty cool,
is that now our compare is no longer
the huge portion of this whole thing.
We see that there's something
about app context and graphics,
which if you're using the
hardware accelerator would
be a lot lower than this.
So this is a really cool
way for you to find out what
actually is your bottleneck.
Obviously, you wouldn't be writing these
really bad sort routines,
but who knows where things
might pop up like this.
If you're using a library
from someone else,
you'll actually see what
parts of their library,
as long as it's not been
obfuscated or something like that,
what parts of their library are slow.
You can even see into our libraries
and see what's going on inside
of graphics and things like that,
but you don't necessarily
want to do that.
But sometimes it's fun to do.
And we've actually used this.
A lot of our graphics
code is written in Java,
so we use this all the time.
I mean, I have engineers,
other coworkers of mine
are coming in and saying,
you know,
I made some changes over the past
week and everything just slowed down.
Like JBuilder doesn't run very fast.
What's going on?
And we haven't changed anything.
And we run it through
here and we find that,
yeah, it was someone did a really bad
draw circle or something like that.
And so we optimize that and we
get back our 10 times improvement.
So it's pretty cool.
Let me just show you another thing.
Which is useful.
This is the VM statistics.
I've had this running the whole time.
And it shows you things that
lead into what the other people
before me all were talking about,
which is you don't want to load
all your classes right away.
So you can turn this on at startup
and you can see your classes
being loaded and it'll show
you as you do different things.
So if you actually have
dynamically loading classes,
which is what you want,
you want to load them slowly as users
get to different portions of your app,
you'll see your classes
going up and up and up.
Plus threads active.
So if I were to go over here and
I actually say sort first name,
oh wait.
[Transcript missing]
or something that's going to be really
slow here like resizing these things.
And you can see what's
changed since you did that.
And you can see that a whole bunch
of char arrays were allocated.
Rectangles, obviously we use a lot of
rectangles in graphics.
And they should mostly go away
when you run a garbage collector.
So I hit the garbage collector
and we see that rectangle went
down to none so we did a good job.
There's something going on where
there's one string and one character
and we might go hunt those down
for references or something.
But that's basically what you have.
There's a lot of different
things in this sampler.
You actually can do, let's see, this is a
There it is.
So you have different types of profiling.
I did all this profiling using sampling,
so every five milliseconds it tried
to get what routine we were using.
I could crank this down or up.
I could also go to this
method called instrumentation,
which is every single instruction,
every single call is being calculated
so that you don't miss anything
because it only happened for half
a millisecond and you happen to
always miss that half a millisecond.
Sampling usually works pretty well.
Instrumentation will slow
your app down even more.
A couple things about running this.
This requires the 131 interpreter
or hotspot version that's in DP1.
I'm running this all on the
interpreter from a pre-DP1 release.
That's why my app is even slower,
but it worked pretty
well for this sort demo.
The other thing is that I just
wanted to mention again,
this UI was done in IFC.
The guy who writes Optimize it wrote IFC,
so he loves it,
but that's why it's not an Aqua look.
I'm going to show you how
it looks like in a second.
This is his own UI inside of there.
If you're interested in finding out
when it's going to be available and how
much it's going to cost and all that,
contact VMGear.
It's VMGear.com.
I'm sure they'd love to hear from all
you guys because they got this up and
working and they're excited to have a
whole bunch of sales to Java programmers.
That's about it.
There's a little slide with a
roadmap of the relevant talks that
are coming up following this one.
There's a demonstration and talk about
JBuilder that you might want to go to.
in the Civic Center just after this talk.
And then some of the other ones,
quick time for Java.
As I mentioned in my bit,
Apple Performance Tools,
that'll give you more information
about the performance tools if you're
specifically interested in that.
So all we'll do now is we'll
have a quick Q&A session.
I'll invite the rest of the...